now as the number of so-called safe
zones shrinks in Gaza the United Nations
is warning that anarchy is spreading
across the strip senior UN agency
officials say the lack of local law
enforcement and basic supplies is
pitting people against one another
that's leading to rampant looting
unlawful killings and
shootings people in Gaza are constantly
on the Move seeking safety
from the
bombings the elements and more and more
from each other United Nations staff say
nearly the entire population has been
driven from their homes many displaced
several times and they warn desperate
living conditions have led to a
breakdown in Civic order and widespread
lawlessness there is looting mob Justice
extortion of money family disputes
random shootings fighting for space and
resources and we see youths armed with
sticks Manning
barricades the UN says continued
bombardments severe overcrowding and
shortages of basic supplies are the main
drivers of the chaos shelter the
creation of these conditions has led to
the predictable and entirely foreseeable
unraveling of the fabric of society in
Gaza setting people against one another
in a fight for
survival the un's regional director says
nobody is enforcing Civic
order so this is the Anarchy that we
talk about and it's extremely dangerous
as well and we need to pay attention
here we want the police to be back on
the street and to bring some order there
this video released by the Israeli Army
purportedly shows gunman seizing an aid
truck in the Rafa area of Southern Gaza
the UN says this is predictable given
the circumstances and it's up to Israel
to ensure the steady entry and delivery
of daily
Essentials this is the legal
responsibility of Israel not just to
facilitate Aid getting in but then to
facilitate the safe distribution of that
Aid none of these things have been
happening for 9
months the UN wants an immediate end to
the fighting to help rest public order
and begin the mammoth task of rebuilding
homes and
lives Simon Maven is focused on the
Middle East as a professor of
international politics at Lancaster
University in the UK welcome to DW Simon
thanks so much for your time so we heard
their suggestions of Anarchy in Gaza who
would you say is responsible for Law and
Order in Gaza right
now well I don't think I think it's all
L surprising that there is anarchy I
mean after all this is a war zone there
is Devastation there's been Devastation
going on for 300 days if not even longer
so I think that's the really important
thing to remember that there is a
specific context that play here now if
we're talking about Law and Order in
Gaza well I guess you would initially
say that it would be the the governing
body the the organization that is
responsible for uh for for imposing
order but that would be Hamas now Hamas
is engaged in a struggle a violent
struggle against Israel of course Israel
is is engaging militarily in the Gaza
Strip and so that makes it incredibly
difficult for the daytoday organization
of security those uh individuals who had
been
operating in the Gaza security forces
have obviously been
coopted into the direct struggle against
Israel so it's an incredibly difficult
thing
that has has diverted
resources away from the provision of
Civic
safety would you say that this was an
inevitable situation the security
situation that we're seeing on the
ground
now I I think sadly yes it was in the
sense that when conflict breaks out and
it breaks out in an all consum
way with a a force that is hugely
disproportionate on the ground and
imposing their own vision of order at
odds with the indigenous way of doing
politics then it becomes
incredibly difficult for the normal
rhythms of life to continue and when you
factor in the huge numbers of people
that are struggling for food for shelter
that are suffering from malnutrition
from basic health issues um children are
struggling with diarrhea with with
dehydration it's 32 degrees in Gaza
right now but there is no clean
water there is a a real
challenge for people there if we can
talk about security I mean we saw in our
report there the images provided by
Israel of an aid truck that was
allegedly commandeered by gunmen in Gaza
what kind of security is there for Aid
deliveries for Aid
workers well that's been a bit of a
tricky one in the sense that that is
also Up For Debate there have been
numerous uh debate and argument between
the UN and the Israelis over what level
of security what level of protection
should and can be given to these Aid uh
convoys it's incredibly important to get
the aid in now the UN is saying that the
the the aid has been made more
challenging because of the the Israeli
approach to getting uh the right level
of security in on the on the grounds of
the the trucks but the Israelis are
saying that that this is not the case
that this is Hamas and I think what that
does is it points to the The Wider
battle about how this is all being told
this is also a battle about the
narratives it's about what stories each
side is is telling about what is going
on and unfortunately it's the people of
Gaza the 500,000 people in Gaza that are
on the brink of a pretty devastating
starvation that are the ones really
suffering right now Simon if we can look
to the Future what about in the longer
term what is the future of Law and Order
in
Gaza I guess all of that depends on what
the next steps are for Gaza if there is
a ceasefire or if there is a
continuation of of the status quo if the
continuation of the status quo uh takes
the form of pre-october
7 then we see the Israeli occupation or
the Israeli blockading of Gaza so
security would then
be be achieved by Israel in conjunction
with a local Force previously this was
the Palestinian Authority and
but if it's a different type of
political agreement if there is a
ceasefire and steps taken towards a
two-state solution towards the
establishment of a Palestinian State
then this would be the prerogative of a
of a Palestinian force or indeed an
international Force but unfortunately
with the no no real sign of a ceasefire
in sight it's incredibly difficult to to
speculate beyond that Professor Simon
Maven from Lancaster University in the
UK okay thank you so much for your time